# Green IT - Dynamic Network Topologies
Final year honours project dissertation for Bachelor of Computer Systems Engineering with the University of Southern Queensland, completed in 2015


## Abstract
All engineering disciplines are influenced by the global focus on energy consumption reduction and sustainability. Due to its resident inefficiency, The ICT sector is of particular concern, and there has been extensive work to develop sustainability enhancements to networks and/or network devices. Previous work presented dynamic topology concepts in which the behaviour and topology of the devices and the network react dynamically in response to traffic demands, with the intent of placing devices into standby states to reduce energy consumption. The key aim of this study is to develop a dynamic topology mechanism implementation; it proposes a testbed environment and corresponding dynamic topology mechanism that makes use of two programs: one running on a centralised controller, and one running on the network nodes. The former determines the optimal topology based on energy consumption reductions and network traffic, while the latter uses MPLS to implement the topology. The testbed is used to determine the dynamic topology mechanism’s effectiveness and impact on network performance, and does so by subjecting it to controlled variations in network traffic. Quantitative measurements of the dynamic topology mechanism’s network performance metrics are presented and analysed relative to baseline measurements. The analysis shows that the dynamic topology mechanism is quite effective, as the effect on network performance is mostly minimal and the reaction to network traffic variations is sufficiently swift. The system takes approximately 30 seconds to react to traffic variations and implement topology changes, and has negligible effect on jitter, packet loss, and the number of out of order packets. However, it produces an average increase in delay of 8 ms, the source of which requires further investigation. This study proves the feasibility of dynamic topology mechanism implementation, and provides a framework for further development and eventual widespread deployment.
